Sand. It's being smuggled
on a global scale.
There are many billions
of dollars worth
of sand being dug up
and sold illegally every year.
It's cheap and easy to extract.
It is a low risk,
high reward business.
Sometimes involving criminal gangs,
violence, even murder.
My complaints were not taken seriously
until I got attacked by the sand mafia.
So why is sand in such high demand?
The modern world is made of it.
Sand is in concrete,
asphalt, glass and silicon.
It even turns up
in places you wouldn't expect.
We use sand in cosmetics,
in certain kinds of wine,
we use sand in paint,
we use sand to make elastics.
Around 50 billion tons of sand
and gravel are used every year.
That's enough to cover the whole
of Argentina
in a layer one centimetre thick.
90% of all the sand mined
goes into the construction industry.
China and India
are the biggest consumers.
All over the developing world.
Hundreds of millions of people
are moving from the countryside
into cities every year.
So worldwide, we are building the
equivalent of nine New York cities
every single year.
And not all of the world's sand
can be used for construction,
desert sands eroded by wind
are round.
The best sand for concrete has
jagged edges and comes from rivers,
this shape helps it bind together,
making it strong and durable.
Sand is taken from riverbeds by hand
or by dredges,
and more is being extracted
than can naturally be replenished.
Sand, which is the second
most extracted material in the world
after water, is in short supply.
Globally, the sand market is worth
around $165 billion,
but it's nearly impossible to know how
much of that has been sourced illegally.
The estimates range anywhere, you know,
up into the tens of billions of dollars.
We know for sure
that there's illegal sand mining
in dozens and dozens of countries.
That happens in Western Europe and North
America on a relatively small scale,
and it happens in the developing world
on like a millions of tonne scale.
Researchers estimate that
in these countries,
more than 50% of sand mining
is illegal,
but no organization tracks sand,
so there isn't international data.
In The Gambia, a one off Interpol
operation targeting illegal activity
found unprecedented levels
of illicit sand mining.
This is all dredged sand from
the seaside, huge mountains of sand.
Illegal mining means sand is removed
without proper authorization
or from prohibited areas.
And once it's mixed with legal sand,
it's almost impossible
to tell the difference.
It can be transported
to a construction site
and no one knows where it came from,
and nobody asked questions.
It can be moved on a container ship and
nobody knows where the source of it is.
Ease of extraction,
high demand for concrete, and
the fact that sand is legal to buy
and sell mean that illegal mining
continues with little opposition.
Sand is a free commodity.
Anybody who is strong enough,
powerful enough can go and collect sand.
And it's often at the local level
where exploitation starts and
where so-called sand mafias operate.
It can be either a small villager
who's taking sand from the beach
to build his own house,
right up to the point
where people who have taken sand
and realized how lucrative it is have
risen and formed networks and gangs.
This is usually possible
through bribery or intimidation.
There is just major corruption of local
and regional governments in sand mining
because there's very little capacity
to enforce prohibitions.
Criminal activity,
including sand mafias,
are making headlines
as illegal mining turns violent.
Hundreds of people have been murdered
over sand just in the last few years,
and that's been, I mean,
there's documented cases
of this happening in Mexico,
in Ghana, in Indonesia,
in many, many countries around
the world, and especially in India.
I was attacked
in 2004 by sand miners,
and that's when it became
more serious and more intense for me.
Since then, Sumaira has been campaigning
against illegal sand mining
and highlighting the effect it's
having in India and around the world.
Well, if your houses are washed away,
it impacts you immediately.
Even without a catastrophe
like a flood,
you can see the effects because you
can see the erosion on a daily basis.
Over mining of rivers and beaches
means there's a greater risk
of landslides and flooding,
while dredging has significant
consequences for fragile ecosystems.
When you when you do that, when
you suck up the bottom of a river,
obviously whatever was living
down there,
whatever kind of fish and plant life
were living on that riverbed,
you've just annihilated
their habitat, wiped it out.
New technologies could help.
More concrete than ever
is being recycled,
and sand can be created artificially
by crushing rocks.
But manufacturing is expensive,
and both are energy intensive.
And as long as extracting sand
remains cheap and plentiful,
cracking down
on sand smuggling won't be easy.
You need to have
communities much more involved
in monitoring illegal sand mining,
you've got
to be addressing the corruption,
you need to raise awareness.
And because nobody is paying
adequate attention to it, it goes on
and the devastation continues.